maintainers/README: add guidelines for committers (#351744)
NixOS/nixpkgs: maintainers/README.md

Various utility scripts, which are mainly useful for nixpkgs maintainers,
are available under `./scripts/`.  See its [README](./scripts/README.md)
for further information.

# Guidelines for Committers

When merging changes, care must be taken to reduce impact to the `master`
branch. If a commit breaks evaluation in `master` it could make it into new PR
branches and cause further breakage.

> One approach to avoid merging such problematic changes is to wait for successful Borg evaluation.

Reviewer: Ofborg

> One approach to avoid merging such problematic changes is to wait for successful Borg evaluation.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should directly encourage the usage of `nixpkgs-review` here too? Ofborg can take a long while to get around to an evaluation, even more so if the derivation is for darwin. Encouraging a self-test would be great, plus it lets contributers know that there are other things they can do besides wait for Ofborg.

Author: So my main reason to wait for Borg was to avoid commits like https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/commit/60900303b5ebdbf43ede288b704b655b33d5e4a5 breaking Darwin eval on master. Thoughg interestingly, the eval failure wasn't even caught by Ofborg before I merged that PR.

Reviewer 2: Oh for sure! Ofborg eval is very helpful especially because it will evaluate all the systems, no denying its usefulness. I think it would just be nice to also add a little note about `nixpkgs-review`, mainly because as it is now, its briefly mentioned in the PR template and is surrounded by all the other checkboxes that it can be easily missed. Having it documented standalone and encouraged for every new PR would be a great practice for new contributers to pick up

## Breaking changes

In general breaking changes to `master` and `staging` branches are permitted.
Though restrictions might apply towards the end of a NixOS release cycle. This
is to avoid large-scale breakages shortly before or during a Zero Hydra
Failures (ZHF) campaign. These restrictions also intend to decrease the
likelihood of a delayed NixOS release.

These are some example changes and if they are considered a breaking change
during a freeze period:

> - `foo: 1.2.3 -> 1.2.4` - Assuming this package follows semantic versioning and

Reviewer 3: What about adding another example about bumping leaf packages with breaking changes.  I used to think they are not allowed during the freeze period.  However, according to the intention of the freeze period, they presumably are allowed.

  none of its dependent packages fail to build because of this change, it can be
  safely merged.
- `unmaintained-software: drop` - If this PR removes a leaf package or the
  removal doesn't otherwise break other packages, it can be merged.
- `cool-tool: rename from fancy-tool` - As long as this PR replaces all

>   references to the old attribute name with the new name, it can be merged.

Reviewer: And maybe adds an alias

Various utility scripts, which are mainly useful for nixpkgs maintainers,
are available under `./scripts/`.  See its [README](./scripts/README.md)
for further information.

# Guidelines for Committers

> When merging changes, care must be taken to reduce impact to the `master`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When merging pull requests, care must be taken to reduce impact to the `master`
```

> branch. If a commit breaks evaluation in `master` it could make it into new PR
> branches and cause further breakage.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
branch. If a commit breaks evaluation, it will affect Ofborg evaluation results
in other pull requests and block hydra CI, thus introducing chaos to our workflow.
```

One approach to avoid merging such problematic changes is to wait for
successful Ofborg evaluation. Additionally, using tools like `nixpkgs-review`
can help spot issues early, before Ofborg finishes evaluation.

## Breaking changes

> In general breaking changes to `master` and `staging` branches are permitted.
> Though restrictions might apply towards the end of a NixOS release cycle. This
> is to avoid large-scale breakages shortly before or during a Zero Hydra
> Failures (ZHF) campaign. These restrictions also intend to decrease the
> likelihood of a delayed NixOS release.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In general breaking changes to `master` and `staging` branches are permitted.
Though restrictions might apply towards the end of a NixOS release cycle, due to
our feature freeze mechanism.
This is to avoid large-scale breakages shortly before and during a Zero Hydra
Failures (ZHF) campaign. These restrictions also intend to decrease the
likelihood of a delayed NixOS release. The feature freeze period is documented
in the announcement of each release schedule.
```

These are some example changes and if they are considered a breaking change
during a freeze period:

- `foo: 1.2.3 -> 1.2.4` - Assuming this package follows semantic versioning and
  none of its dependent packages fail to build because of this change, it can be

>   safely merged.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  safely merged. If it can be confirmed that there is no major change in
  its functionality or API, but only adding new features or fixing bugs, it
  can also be merged.
```

- `unmaintained-software: drop` - If this PR removes a leaf package or the
  removal doesn't otherwise break other packages, it can be merged.
- `cool-tool: rename from fancy-tool` - As long as this PR replaces all
  references to the old attribute name with the new name and adds an alias, it
  can be merged.
- `libpopular: 4.3.2 -> 5.0.0` - If this PR would trigger many rebuilds and/or
  target `staging`, it should probably be delayed until after the freeze-period
  is over. Alternatively, if this PR is for a popular package and doesn't cause
  many rebuilds, it should also be delayed to reduce risk of breakage. If a PR
  includes important changes, such as security fixes, it should be brought up to

>   release managers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  release managers.
- `nixos/transmission: refactor` - If this PR adjusts the type, default value or effect of
   options in the NixOS module, so that users must rewrite their configuration to keep
   the current behavior unchanged, it should not be merged, as we don't have enough
   time to collect user feedback and avoid possible breakage. However, it should be
   accepted if the previous behavior associated with the modifications has completely
   broken.
```

Various utility scripts, which are mainly useful for nixpkgs maintainers,
are available under `./scripts/`.  See its [README](./scripts/README.md)
for further information.

# Guidelines for Committers

When merging pull requests, care must be taken to reduce impact to the `master`
branch. If a commit breaks evaluation, it will affect Ofborg evaluation results
in other pull requests and block Hydra CI, thus introducing chaos to our
workflow.

One approach to avoid merging such problematic changes is to wait for

> successful Ofborg evaluation. Additionally, using tools like `nixpkgs-review`

Reviewer 2: Just thought about it, could/should we change \`nixpkgs-review\` to \[nixpkgs-review\]\(https:\/\/github.com/Mic92/nixpkgs-review)?

can help spot issues early, before Ofborg finishes evaluation.

## Breaking changes

> In general breaking changes to `master` and `staging` branches are permitted.

Reviewer: Mentioning notable breaking charges in the release notes is nice though.

Though restrictions might apply towards the end of a NixOS release cycle, due
to our feature freeze mechanism. This is to avoid large-scale breakages shortly

> before and during a Zero Hydra Failures (ZHF) campaign. These restrictions also

Reviewer 2: should we explain what "ZHF" is, or is that too out of scope? Maybe instead we could link to somewhere that mentions ZHF?

Author: I think it's usually explained in the release schedule/ZHF issue and as that is a moving target I think it's okay to not link to anything here

intend to decrease the likelihood of a delayed NixOS release. The feature
freeze period is documented in the announcement of each release schedule.

> These are some example changes and if they are considered a breaking change

Reviewer: This could be a nested paragraph, then it's clearer it's separate from the other guidelines and only counts for a limited time (around releases).
